Move docs site markdown files into main repo (#162)
tigerbeetle/tigerbeetle: docs/reference/accounts.md

# Accounts

TigerBeetle uses the same data structures internally and
externally. This means that sometimes you need to set temporary values
for fields that TigerBeetle, not you (the user), are responsible.

### Updates

Account fields *cannot be changed by the user* after
creation. However, debits and credits fields are updated by

> TigerBeetle as transfers happen to and from the account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TigerBeetle as transfers move money to and from an account.
```

## Fields

### `id`

> This is the identifier, the primary key, of the account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the unique identifier, the primary key, of the account.
```

As an example, you might use a UUID (encoded as an integer) that ties
the account back to a row in a SQL database.

Constraints:

* Type is 128-bit unsigned integer (16 bytes)

> * Must be unique

Reviewer: `id` can't be zero or `intMax(u128)`.

Author: Is `intMax(u128)` the same as `2^128 - 1`. I'm trying to leave zig-specific stuff out of any non-zig docs so that folks unfamiliar with Zig have an easier time.

Reviewer: Good point! Yes, it is.

### `user_data`

This is an optional second identifier to link this account to an
external entity.

As an example, you might use a UUID (encoded as an integer) that
ties together a group of accounts.

Constraints:

* Type is 128-bit unsigned integer (16 bytes)
* May be zero

### `reserved`

Reserved for future use.

Constraints:

* Type is 48 bytes
* Must be zero

### `ledger`

Identifier used to enforce transfers between the same ledger.

As an example, you might use `1` to represent USD and `2` to represent
EUR.

Constraints:

* Type is 32-bit unsigned integer (4 bytes)
* Must not be zero

### `code`

> Reason for the transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reason for the transfer.
```
Did you mean to say "account"?

Author: Fixed. Will still want @jorangreef to confirm that the new definition of code on Account is reasonable

As an example, you might use `1` to represent deposits and `2` to
represent settlements.

Constraints:

* Type is 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes)

### `flag`

Specifies behavior during transfers.

Constraints:

* Type is 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes)

### `debits_pending`

Amount of pending debits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `debits_posted`

Amount of posted debits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `credits_pending`

Amount of pending credits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `credits_posted`

Amount of posted credits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `timestamp`

Time the account was created. This is set by TigerBeetle. The format
is UNIX timestamp in nanoseconds.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

> * User sets to zero on creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User sets to zero on creation; the timestamp will be set by the cluster to the moment the account is committed.
```

Author: This was already sort of mentioned in the non-constraints part of it. But I can add the part about "moment the account is committed" to that description sentence

Author: Updated there

# Accounts

> 

Reviewer: Since this is a reference, we should start by defining (at a high level) what an `Account` is in TigerBeetle, i.e. what it represents. Assume that the reader knows about databases and accounting — but not necessarily how TigerBeetle combines the two. We need to define our terms.

Along the lines of:

```suggestion
An `Account` is a record storing the cumulative effect of committed [transfers](./transfers.md).

`Account`s use double-entry accounting: each tracks debits and credits separately.

```

Maybe also mention that the sum of all debits in the database always equals the sum of all credits.

TigerBeetle uses the same data structures internally and
externally. This means that sometimes you need to set temporary values
for fields that TigerBeetle, not you (the user), are responsible.

> 

Reviewer: Very rough, and maybe belongs in its own "how-to" document (that we link from here). Also can be generalized to Transfers.

```suggestion

### Secondary Databases

TigerBeetle accounts may correspond to objects in a secondary data store.

To create such accounts safely, follow the order of operations:

1. Service generates a random UUID (`A`) for the new TigerBeetle `Account`.
2. Service records the UUID `A` in the corresponding object of the secondary database, along with a flag indicating that the `Account` does not exist yet.
3. Service sends a "create account" for `A` to TigerBeetle.
4. Service receives TigerBeetle's reply: if it is `ok` or `exists`, update the corresponding object's flag to indicate that the account now exists.

To understand why this ordering is important, consider if it was not followed:

1. Service generates a random UUID (`A`) for the new TigerBeetle `Account`.
2. Service sends a "create account" for `A` to TigerBeetle.
3. Service restarts (e.g. due to power failure or a deploy).
4. Service generates a random UUID (`B`) for the new TigerBeetle `Account`.
5. Service sends a "create account" for `B` to TigerBeetle.
6. Service receives TigerBeetle's reply: if it is `ok`, record the UUID `B` in the corresponding object of the secondary database.

This still works, but account `A` is now inaccessible.

The first version handles gracefully a crash by reusing the account's UUID and checking `exists` — if the service receives `exists`, it can assume that it was restarted and the current "create account" is a retry.

#### Reusing Ids

If the corresponding objects in the secondary data store have UUIDs, and they will map one-to-one with TigerBeetle's `Account`s, then their UUIDs may be reused to implicitly link the corresponding object to an `Account`.

```

(Is there another term we could use instead of "secondary"? It is secondary from TigerBeetle's point of view, but from their system's point of view it may be the other way around, so that might create confusion.)

Author: I'm saving your draft and I'll add it in another PR if that's ok

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zhLkFdChLdy4goqskZUFvyXOVyzxfPczMD7ZYpZCPuI/edit

### Updates

Account fields *cannot be changed by the user* after
creation. However, debits and credits fields are updated by
TigerBeetle as transfers move money to and from an account. And the

> `timestamp` field is set by TigerBeetle after the create request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Account fields *cannot be changed by the user* after
creation. However, debits and credits fields are updated by
TigerBeetle as transfers move money to and from an account.
```

Leave out the part about the timestamp; it is internal. We can just mention in the `timestamp` section that it is set by the server, not the client.

> ## Fields

Reviewer: I think since this Reference is written for _users_ of TigerBeetle rather than _developers_ of TigerBeetle (or client implementers), we don't need to specify e.g. the types of fields. So (for example) instead of declaring that `code`:

> Type is 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes)
> Must not be zero

Instead:

> Must be between 1 and 2^16 - 1 (inclusive).

And likewise for others. But `amount`/balance representations are more directly exposed, so I they should still specify their types.

Author: If we're going to expose the detail in some might as well expose it in all. I don't think it is less clear for the user. If it means nothing to them they'd gloss over it, I think. And otherwise it helps you to understand IMO

Reviewer: :thinking: What I mean is that we are specifying a "type" here, but that may not agree with the type used by their client implementation. e.g. in the reference, we would say that `id` is an unsigned 128-bit integer — but in the javascript client, `id`'s type is a `BigInt`. I think that could be confusing.

### `id`

This is the unique identifier, the primary key, of the account.

As an example, you might use a UUID (encoded as an integer) that ties
the account back to a row in a SQL database.

Constraints:

* Type is 128-bit unsigned integer (16 bytes)
* Must not be zero or `2^128 - 1`

> * Must be unique

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`id` is a unique, client-defined identifier for the account.

The `id` should be a UUID.

Constraints:

* Type is 128-bit unsigned integer (16 bytes)
* Must not be zero or `2^128 - 1` (the highest 128-bit unsigned integer).
* Must not conflict with an another account.
```

I think the terminology "primary key" is more specific to conventional relational databases.

And I know I suggested the part about linking to an SQL database, but I think it will be more clear to describe that in its own section (drafted in a prior comment; see "secondary databases").

### `user_data`

> This is an optional second identifier to link this account to an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an optional secondary identifier to link this account to an
```

Also, maybe rewrite to indicate that linking to an external entity is just a suggested use case — from TigerBeetle's point of view, this is arbitrary data.

external entity.

> As an example, you might use a UUID (encoded as an integer) that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, you might use a UUID that
```

I think we don't need to specify that the UUID is integer-encoded in this document. It will clear enough from the client API and documentation.

ties together a group of accounts.

Constraints:

* Type is 128-bit unsigned integer (16 bytes)

> * May be zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

"May be zero" isn't a constraint.

### `reserved`

Reserved for future use.

Constraints:

* Type is 48 bytes
* Must be zero

### `ledger`

Identifier used to enforce transfers between the same ledger.

As an example, you might use `1` to represent USD and `2` to represent
EUR.

Constraints:

* Type is 32-bit unsigned integer (4 bytes)

> * Must not be zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ledger` is an identifier that partitions the sets of accounts that can transact.

Money cannot transfer between two accounts with different `ledger` values. See: `errors.accounts_must_have_the_same_ledger`.

Constraints:

* Type is 32-bit unsigned integer (4 bytes)
* Must not be zero

In a typical use case:
- Map each currency tracked within the database to a distinct ledger. And,
- Tag each account with the `ledger` indicating the currency the balances is denominated in.
```

I'm imagining that the `errors.accounts_must_have_the_same_ledger` would be a link to our error code reference (when we have one :grin: — I think a good place for it would be in a `## Create` block, following the end of the `## Fields` block).

I want to avoid specifying `USD`/`EUR`'s ledgers here, to avoid confusion around "canonical" values. Or maybe we can link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217? I have no idea whether that is recommended.

Also, please use complete sentences — this should be more than a glossary. :wink:

Author: Yes I'll add errors to my list 👍 

> Also, please use complete sentences — this should be more than a glossary. 😉

Sure 👍

Author: Suggestion taken

### `code`

A user-defined enum representing the type of the account.

As an example, you might use codes `1000`-`3340` to indicate asset
accounts in general, where `1001` is Bank Account and `1002` is Money

> Market Account and `2003` is Motor Vehicles and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`code` is user-defined enum denoting the type of the account.

As an example, you might use codes `1000`-`3340` to indicate asset
accounts in general, where `1001` is Bank Account and `1002` is Money
Market Account and `2003` is Motor Vehicles and so on.
```

Is there a less general term we can use than "type" in "type of the account"? Maybe we can draw more heavily from accounting terminology? Or just use "category" which is at least (a little) less overloaded by programming terminology.

Author: Sure, switched to category.

Author: Sure, switched to category.

Constraints:

* Type is 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes)
* Must not be zero

> ### `flag`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `flags`
```

Author: Done

A bitfield that toggles additional behavior.

Constraints:

* Type is 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes)

#### `linked` flag

When the linked flag is specified, it links an account with the next
account in the batch, to create a chain of account, of arbitrary
length, which all succeed or fail in creation together. The tail of a
chain is denoted by the first account without this flag. The last
account in a batch may therefore never have the `linked` flag set as
this would leave a chain open-ended.

Multiple chains or individual accounts may coexist within a batch to
succeed or fail independently. Accounts within a chain are executed
within order, or are rolled back on error, so that the effect of each
account in the chain is visible to the next, and so that the chain is
either visible or invisible as a unit to subsequent accounts after the
chain. The account that was the first to break the chain will have a
unique error result. Other accounts in the chain will have their error

> result set to `linked_event_failed`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `linked` flag is specified, it links an account with the next
account in the batch, to create a chain of account, of arbitrary
length, which all succeed or fail in creation together. The tail of a
chain is denoted by the first account without this flag. The last
account in a batch may therefore never have the `linked` flag set as
this would leave a chain open-ended.

Multiple chains or individual accounts may coexist within a batch to
succeed or fail independently. Accounts within a chain are executed
in order, or are rolled back on error, so that the effect of each
account in the chain is visible to the next, and so that the chain is
either visible or invisible as a unit to subsequent accounts after the
chain. The account that was the first to break the chain will have a
unique error result. Other accounts in the chain will have their error
result set to `linked_event_failed`.
```

Author: Taken

> #### `debits_must_not_exceed_credits` flag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `flags.debits_must_not_exceed_credits`
```

Author: Done

When set, transfers will be rejected that would cause this account's
debits to exceed credits. Specifically when `account.debits_pending +
account.debits_posted + transfer.amount > account.credits_posted`.

This cannot be set when `credits_must_not_exceed_debits` is also set.

#### `credits_must_not_exceed_debits` flag

> When set, transfers will be rejected that would cause this account's
> credits to exceed debits. Specifically when `account.credits_pending +
> account.credits_posted + transfer.amount > account.debits_posted`.
> 
> This cannot be set when `debits_must_not_exceed_credits` is also set.

Reviewer: This first sentence (and the corresponding one in `credits_must_not_exceed_debits`) read backwards to me. What about

```suggestion
When set, transfers which would cause the account's debits to exceed its credits are rejected..

In other words, transfers which would break the invariant: `account.debits_pending + account.debits_posted + transfer.amount ≤ account.credits_posted` are rejected with `error.exceeds_credits`.

`flags.credits_must_not_exceed_debits` cannot be set when `flags.debits_must_not_exceed_credits` is also set.
```

I think defining the invariant in a positive rather than negative statement is more readable.

### `debits_pending`

> Amount of pending debits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`debits_pending` counts debits reserved by pending transfers. When a pending transfer posts, voids, or times out, the amount is removed from `debits_pending`.

Money in `debits_pending` is reserved — that is, it cannot be spent until the corresponding pending transfer finishes.
```

Constraints:

> * Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

Reviewer: I will shortly (in the next week or two, when I get to it) be creating a PR to enforce that all 4 account amount fields are zero when the account is created, so you may as well document that constraint.

Author: Done, thanks!

### `debits_posted`

Amount of posted debits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `credits_pending`

Amount of pending credits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `credits_posted`

Amount of posted credits.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)

### `timestamp`

Time the account was created. This is set by TigerBeetle. The format
is UNIX timestamp in nanoseconds.

It is set by TigerBeetle the moment the account is committed (created

> by consensus).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`timestamp` is the time the account was created, as nanoseconds since UNIX epoch.

`timestamp` is not set by the client.
`timestamp` is set by TigerBeetle to the moment the account arrives at the cluster.
```

Author: Taken but dropped the part about the client since in the constraints I say that the client must set it to zero.

Constraints:

* Type is 64-bit unsigned integer (8 bytes)
* User sets to zero on creation

## Internals

> 

Reviewer: Also link to the state machine. Reference `create_account()`.
